JUDY WOODRUFF: A wave of deadly
attacks by Islamic State
militants puts Egypt on edge.
Good evening. I'm Judy
Woodruff. Gwen Ifill is away.
Also ahead this Wednesday: From
health care to marriage, a
historic term for the Supreme
Court comes to a close. We talk
with President Obama's point
person on health care, Secretary
Sylvia Burwell, and review
the high court's year.
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal": We saw in many of the
big cases this term
that the justices on the right
don't march in lockstep when it
comes to interpreting
the Constitution.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, teaching
for the whole brain -- educators
harness discoveries in
neuroscience to improve
how students learn.
JASSELLE CIRINO, Teacher,
Francis Scott Key Elementary:
We like to say that the more
you talk, the more students you
lose, and so we use different
methods to engage multiple
parts of the brain. And that
way, you get 100 percent
engagement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And exploring
the mysteries of Ceres, a dwarf
planet that hangs out in
the asteroid belt.
Those are some of the stories
we're covering on tonight's "PBS
NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. Justice
Department has launched an
investigation of major airlines
and possible collusion to keep
fares higher. The department
confirmed the probe after
the Associated Press reported it
focuses on whether carriers have
limited available seats.
American Airlines, Delta,
Southwest and United now control
more than 80 percent of
all seats on domestic flights.
The United States and Cuba will
reopen their embassies in each
other's countries, in Havana
and Washington, later this month
for the first time in more than
50 years. President Obama
made the formal announcement
this morning in the White House
Rose Garden. He said
both countries are
ready to move forward.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: Instead of
supporting democracy and
opportunity
for the Cuban people, our
efforts to isolate Cuba, despite
good intentions, increasingly
had the opposite effect,
cementing the status quo and
isolating the United States from
our
neighbors in this hemisphere.
The progress that we mark today
is yet another demonstration
that we don't have to be
imprisoned
by the past. When something
isn't working, we can and will
change.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary of
State John Kerry will travel to
Cuba for the American Embassy's
opening on July 20.
Secretary Kerry is in Vienna now
for the Iran nuclear talks. He
said today there's been
enough progress to go beyond
yesterday's deadline. His
Iranian counterpart, Mohammad
Javad
Zarif, also talked of progress,
but he offered few details.
Investigators converged on a
small South Carolina town today,
after the latest in a series of
fires at black churches across
the south. Mount Zion AME
Church at Greeleyville burned
last night. The fire broke out
as lightning was moving across
the area, and federal
investigators
said initial indications suggest
it wasn't arson. But they're
not ready to make that
official.
CRAIG CHILCOTT, ATF: We haven't
ruled anything in or anything
out at this point. We're
going to let the case dictate
and we're going to investigate
it, as the facts will ultimately
determine what occurred. We're
going to bring all the assets of
the federal government
to bear to investigate
this -- this fire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The same church
was the target of a fire set by
two Ku Klux Klan members
in 1995.
The presidential fund-raising
race has begun in earnest.
Democrat Hillary Clinton's
campaign
said today that it took in more
than $45 million in the second
quarter. That eclipses a record
set by President Obama in 2011.
Clinton formally announced her
bid in April.
The president's residence is
making itself more welcoming to
some visitors and more hostile
to others. Officials today
ended a 40-year ban on
photography during public tours
of
the White House by encouraging
people to snap pictures. But
selfie sticks and video cameras
remain on the banned list.
Meanwhile, outside the executive
mansion, work crews added sharp
metal spikes to the fencing to
stop intruders. That follows
several security breaches.
Thousands of people marched in
Hong Kong today, pressing the
city's leader to step down, and
calling for full democracy. The
annual protest marks the city's
handover from British to
Chinese rule in 1997. Last
year, pro-democracy forces
blocked streets for 79 days,
demanding
reforms.
In Indonesia, the death toll
passed 140 in the crash of a
military transport plane. The
plane went down Tuesday, after
taking off from Medan city. By
today, an excavator
began clearing away what's
left of the wreckage.
LT. COL. MOHAMAD RIDWAN,
Indonesian Army (through
translator): Today, we have
completed the
evacuation of the bodies. We
hope that the evacuation of the
aircraft's tail can be completed
as soon as possible. Our
constraint is the lack of
equipment we need for cutting to
quickly
move the wreckage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Investigators
are now focused on why the plane
had far more passengers than
first believed. Civilians
apparently were permitted on
board for a fee, in violation
of military rules.
The wave of migrants crossing
the Mediterranean has grown more
than 80 percent from a year
ago. The United Nations Refugee
Agency reported today that
137,000 refugees have landed in
Europe since January. That far
outstrips the 75,000 who made
the crossing in the first
half of 2014. Greece is now the
leading destination for the
migrants.
In economic news, Wall Street
pushed higher, anticipating that
the June jobs report due
tomorrow will be stronger than
expected. The Dow Jones
industrial average gained nearly
140 points to close near 17760.
The Nasdaq rose 26 points and
the S&P 500 added 14.
U.S. soccer fans celebrated
today, after the women's
national team reached the World
Cup
final. The Americans beat
Germany 2-0 in last night's
semifinal in Montreal. They
will play either Japan or
England in Sunday's title match.
And the man known as Britain's
Schindler for saving Jewish
children from the Nazis has
died. In 1939, Nicholas Winton
managed to get more than 650
children on trains out of
Czechoslovakia, just before
World War II broke out.
Nicholas Winton was 106 years
old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Islamic State militants wage
coordinated attacks on troops
stationed in Egypt's Northern
Sinai; an uncertain future for
Greece in Europe as it heads
toward
a referendum; U.S. Health and
Human Services Secretary Sylvia
Burwell on the future of
health care; analyzing a
historic term for the Supreme
Court; techniques informed by
neuroscience to help students
learn better; uncovering the
mysteries of the dwarf planet
Ceres; and hearing again from
the ballet dancer who is now a
first, Misty Copeland.
Islamic State militants fought
for hours with Egyptian
government troops today in the
Northern
Sinai Peninsula. When it was
over, 100 militants and more
than 60 soldiers had reportedly
been
killed.
The lengthy battle began after
the Islamic State forces
launched a massive coordinated
assault on army and
police positions.
For more on this, I spoke with
Reuters correspondent Yara
Bayoumy in Cairo.
Yara Bayoumy, thank you
for talking with us.
First of all, tell us what
happened in the Northern Sinai.
YARA BAYOUMY, Reuters:
Well, it started
out really early this morning
when we heard that there were a
number of attacks on military
checkpoints in North Sinai
by a number of militants.
That happens often, actually,
because North Sinai is the
epicenter of an insurgency here
in Egypt. But it quickly
escalated, and we saw that it
was a very widespread,
coordinated
assault on a number of military
checkpoints in Northern Sinai by
militants. And actually
Islamic State's Egypt's
affiliate claimed responsibility
for those attacks.
We had security forces that did
tell us that the intention of
the militants was to basically
lay siege to one of the town of
Sheikh Zuweid, which is one of
the most (INAUDIBLE) towns
in North Sinai. And, of course,
this is all part of the
militants' broader campaign
in their attacks against
security forces and their
ultimate aim of wanting or
seeking to
topple the Cairo government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I read that this
went on for hours and hours.
How well-equipped,
how prepared was the
Egyptian military?
YARA BAYOUMY: Well, the
Egyptian military has been
fighting this insurgency for
over
-- or about two years now. And
it has actually intensified
since the military ousted
Islamic
President Mohammed Morsi of the
Muslim Brotherhood in 2013,
after mass protests against him.
So, the army has been very --
very used to this kind of
warfare, but, of course, the
Egyptian army is a largely
conventional army. And the
enemy that it's confronting is
largely
an enemy that uses guerrilla
warfare tactics in North Sinai,
so ones that really largely
depends on car bombs, IEDs.
And, of course, we can't forget
that these militants operate in
areas that -- some of
which provide havens for them
within the region. And so it's
a very difficult enemy that
they're confronting. In terms
of how they have managed to do,
this was, as I said, a
very sustained -- a very
sustained attack or clash that
happened today.
Most of the times, the militants
tend to launch attacks and then
disappear or melt away into
various neighborhoods within
Northern Sinai, but, this time,
it seems like they really
did put up a fight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, just
quickly, these militants are an
affiliate, an offshoot of
Islamic State?
YARA BAYOUMY: Right. So
they're called Sinai Province,
and they have -- you know,
they have pledged allegiance
to Islamic State.
And they very early on claimed
responsibility for these
attacks, saying that they have
launched
attacks on 15 military
checkpoints. They carried out
three -- and there were three
suicide bombings. The army said
that they used car bombs as
well. They did have
anti-aircraft
weaponry as well, so they did
seem to have -- they were very
well-prepared for this assault
that they launched today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we're
going to have to leave it there.
Yara Bayoumy, thank you for
joining us from Cairo. We
appreciate it.
YARA BAYOUMY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One day after an
historic missed payment to the
International Monetary
Fund, the scene in Greece became
ever more desperate and chaotic,
as European creditors
rebuffed a late request
by the country's leader.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports from Athens.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Greece's
ceremonial guard symbolizing
national pride marched past the
prime minister's residence, as
Alexis Tsipras blasted his
country's creditors on national
TV.
ALEXIS TSIPRAS, Greek Prime
Minister (through translator):
I know well that at this hour,
the warning sirens are loud.
They are blackmailing you and
calling on you to vote yes to
all
the measures the creditors are
asking for, without any prospect
of coming out of this
crisis.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Instead,
Tsipras urged a show of defiance
against austerity measures
in Sunday's referendum.
ALEXIS TSIPRAS (through
translator): On the other hand,
a no-vote is not just a slogan.
No is a decisive step towards a
better agreement that we aim to
sign immediately after Sunday's
result. It consists of the
people's clear mandate on how
they want to live the next
day. No doesn't mean clashing
with Europe, but returning to a
Europe of values.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Hours earlier,
Tsipras had sent a letter to
those same creditors,
accepting bailout terms, but
with some conditions. They
included keeping in place a
discounted
sales tax for Greek islands
popular with tourists,
stretching out defense spending
cuts and delaying
the phase-out of an income
supplement for poor pensioners.
But for leaders of the European
Union, it was too little, too
late. The view from
German Chancellor Angela Merkel
reinforced by other European
leaders was no deal before
the referendum.
ANGELA MERKEL, German Chancellor
(through translator): Holding a
referendum is a democratic
sovereign right of the Greek
state. It is the legitimate
right of Greece to do that
whenever they want and about
whatever they want. But to make
it as clear, it is also
a democratic sovereign right of
the other 18 member states of
the Eurozone to respond
to the Greek decision
in a proportionate way.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Meanwhile, for
desperate pensioners in Athens,
it was another long,
frustrating day outside the few
designated banks that opened
their doors to retirees.
Only those whose last names
began with the letters A through
I were served, and even
then, they were given the
equivalent of just $133.
Do you have enough money
to pay these people?
MAN: I don't know.
I don't know.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Some of those
in the line couldn't believe how
far they'd fallen.
MAN (through translator): I
lived abroad for 40 years and I
brought back $1.5 million
back into the country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: And as the day
wore on, tensions built and
tempers flared.
MAN (through translator): Don't
push me around or I will punch
you in the face. Don't
tell me how long you have been
here. I have been here since
3:00 this morning.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The police
were called in to keep order,
and in the end, these pensioners
did get their money, but it's a
scene that will doubtless be
repeated tomorrow with many
people now past all patience.
GIORGOS HAZIDIMITRAKIS, Greece
(through translator): Whether
they give me only 120 euros or
not,
it's the same thing. As far as
I am concerned, they're trying
to fool us.
HARALAMBOS KATIS, Greece
(through translator): The
working class should form a
society
which solves the problems of the
ordinary people and not the
profits of the rich.
MALCOLM BRABANT: All of which
sets the stage for a showdown at
the ballot box.
The call by Prime Minister
Alexis Tsipras to Greeks to vote
no in Sunday's referendum
should not come as a surprise to
the country's European partners.
Tsipras is embroiled,
so he says, in a fight to
restore Greek dignity. But make
no mistake. He's also involved
in a battle to secure his
political future and legacy.
If he loses the referendum, he
will no doubt have to resign and
call a general election.
But, according to the latest
opinion polls, the no-camp is
substantially in the lead with
54 percent support, where the
yes-camp is trailing at 33
percent. Those numbers may
narrow over the next coming days
as a result of Greeks government
an early bitter taste
of capital controls -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Malcolm
Brabant in Athens.
And you can see more of
Malcolm's reporting on the Greek
crisis on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
In the wake of the Supreme
Court's decision to uphold the
health care law, the president
headed to Nashville today to
make the case that more states
should participate. More
than 20 states, mostly led by
Republicans, have rejected an
expansion of Medicaid, including
in Tennessee.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: And the federal
government is there to help
and to work with those states
that are ready to get going.
I will tell you, the states that
have taken full advantage of all
the federal options
available, they have an even
lower uninsured rate and a
healthier population, and more
people signing up for the
options that are available than
those state how have not taken
full advantage of those options.
And that's just a fact.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We pick up on
what happens now to the health
care law and the issues
surrounding coverage and costs.
Department of Health and Human
Services Secretary
MDNM MD-BO Sylvia Burwell is
the point
person for the administration.
MDNM MD-BO Sylvia
Burwell, welcome.
SYLVIA MATHEWS BURWELL, U.S.
Health and Human Services
Secretary: Thank you so much
for
having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So the
administration just won this big
victory in the Supreme Court
just last week, the president
already out on the road saying
it needs to be improved,
the health care law.
How do you know this is a wise
approach when, I guess, half the
American people say they're
still not sure
they like the law?
MDNM MD-BO SYLVIA MATHEWS
BURWELL: Well, I think what we
want to do is use this as
an opportunity to build on the
progress that's been made.
And whether that's the progress
that's been made for those that
are in the employer-based
market, those that no longer can
be kept out of insurance because
of preexisting conditions
or can keep their child on until
26, or those that are newly
insured, we have made a lot
of progress.
And we want to do is turn now
and build on that progress and
use this moment as an
opportunity
to move forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm sure you
know very well Republican
members of Congress, Republicans
running for president are saying
they want to either completely
repeal the law or undo
big chunks of it.
How worried are you that they
may do that either in the next
year-and-a-half or when
there is a new president?
MDNM MD-BO SYLVIA MATHEWS
BURWELL: Well, you know, I
think the president's been clear
about the issue of repeal.
And what we're hoping is that
the conversation can turn to the
substance, and I think that's
what the president was
reflecting today, in terms of
most Americans want to make sure
-- they don't want to go back to
a time where you can't get
insurance if you have
preexisting
conditions or your children up
to 26, or in terms of the
consumer protections that are
in place, and whether that's
lifetime limits no longer exist
or annual limits no longer
exist.
And I don't think folks want to
go back to that. And so I think
what we want to do
is focus on there has been a lot
of progress made in terms of
quality, affordability and
access, but we believe that
there is more that can be made,
and we would like to work
together to do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk
about some of the modifications
that have been discussed.
Even people who support the
plan are saying there are parts
of it that need changing,
the so-called Cadillac tax
on the more generous plans.
The thinking is that this could
cause employers to cut back on
benefits, to pass along the
cost. Is that something that
the administration is willing to
take a look at and maybe get
rid of?
MDNM MD-BO SYLVIA MATHEWS
BURWELL: So, with regard to
what we said about the things
we want to look at, and how
we're going to think about each
of those things is in terms
of, how does it impact access,
affordability and quality, and
what does it do in terms
of the deficit and the
health of the economy?
These are the things that, for
all the issues, we're ready to
have the conversation in terms
of -- in our budget even, we
actually have proposed extending
some of the tax credits
to a larger group of small
businesses. In our budget, we
have also proposed things that
we think will help with
increasing costs in the
pharmaceutical space as well.
And that's about making sure we
have the ability to negotiate
with pharmaceuticals about price
for Part D and Medicare.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what
about the Cadillac tax?
MDNM MD-BO SYLVIA MATHEWS
BURWELL: As I said, in terms of
that one, there is the
issue of what it means in terms
of the deficit. That is a very
expensive thing. And so,
as we think about that, that's
one of the things that we think
is problematic in that
space.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As you know,
also, one of the persistent
criticisms of the law and health
care in general is that the
costs is so high, that premium
costs are high.
We looked at some numbers today.
In many places, people are
paying 10 percent, 20 percent,
even 30 percent of their gross
income for these premiums. How
do you reverse this
trend, which seems to be
happening in places all over the
country?
MDNM MD-BO SYLVIA MATHEWS
BURWELL: So, first, I think
it's important to recognize
that in terms of premium growth,
that we have seen some of the
lowest premium growth in
the employer-based market that
we have seen in many, many years
in terms of a decade.
We have also seen that price
increases in the health system
are at some of the lowest
in decades. With regard to what
we're seeing now in terms of
some of the premiums that
have been posted and are being
talked about, those are the
proposed premiums.
And part of the Affordable Care
Act created a process of
transparency and review. So
when insurers are going to
charge more than a 10 percent
increase, that needs to be
reviewed
and there needs to be
justification. The Affordable
Care Act actually has put in
place
things that we believe both
increase transparency and
increase downward pressure on
the premiums,
but I think everyone knows,
before the Affordable Care Act,
we saw these premium increases
that
existed as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask you
about the difficulty in getting
people to sign up. This
is something I know the
administration's worked very
hard on.
But even today, we're told
something like 18 million
Americans who are eligible who
are uninsured still have not
signed up, decided to buy
insurance. Many of these are
Hispanic,
young people, young men. How do
you reach out to these
individuals? How do you
persuade
them to sign up when they
haven't been willing before now?
MDNM MD-BO SYLVIA MATHEWS
BURWELL: So, we know a couple
of things.
First, 16.4 million fewer
Americans are uninsured now.
And that is progress and
progress we
want to build. We want to do
this year as part of our open
enrollment and focus, as
we did last year, on meeting the
consumer where they are, making
sure that we understand
what these consumers are making
their choices on and that they
have the information they
need to make good decisions and
know that they can find
affordable, quality care.
We know that many people don't
realize that there are tax
credits that can help make it
affordable. We also know that
many people, differing groups
need to be -- have individual
contact. And that's why we use
navigators and assisters, so
that people can ask the
questions of an individual and
have a conversation about what
is a very important and personal
matter.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, of course,
another important part of this
is coverage for low-income
individuals,
for the poor, Medicaid. A
number of governors, a number of
states have said they are not
going to go along with
expanded Medicaid coverage.
There is difficulty. We know
the administration is going to
be reducing, I guess, from 100
percent down to 90 percent of
the portion it covers. You
still see state leaders saying
this is something they can't
afford to do. How do you
persuade them otherwise?
MDNM MD-BO SYLVIA MATHEWS
BURWELL: Well, first, I think
it's important that the 100
percent goes through 2016.
So, for many governors, it's
important to go ahead and fully
get that 100 percent payment
that the federal government is
willing to make in terms of
expanding and providing coverage
for many working people in their
state who can't afford that
coverage right now.
And we believe that, in terms of
the expansion, it's important
for two fundamental reasons.
One is for the individuals.
And those individuals, as I
said, many are working,
are people who can get health
security and financial security
by the expansion.
I think the other thing that's
important is what this does mean
in terms of jobs and the
economy. And in Kentucky, where
they did expand, they have done
studies so that they
make sure they track what's
happening. And a study done by
Deloitte, as well as the
University
of Louisville, showed that, in
the state of Kentucky, by the
year 2021, they expect 40,000
new jobs to be created because
of the expansion and $30 billion
to flow into the budgets of
the state of Kentucky.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So that's
something you will think is
going to happen elsewhere?
MDNM MD-BO SYLVIA MATHEWS
BURWELL: We think it is. And
we think that it's because
of the substance in terms of
what it means in the states,
both for individuals, as well
as for the states' economies
and providers in those states.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sylvia Burwell,
secretary of the Department of
Health and Human Services,
thank you.
MDNM MD-BO SYLVIA MATHEWS
BURWELL: Judy, thanks for
having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, the case on
the health care law, with
Secretary Burwell named as
a defendant, was, of course,
just one decision in a dramatic
and, some believe, historic
Supreme Court session.
That session started last
October, and it ended this week.
In all, the high court
heard 67 cases. Many of the
most significant rulings came
out in just the past seven days.
And some of the decisions
showed surprise splits among the
justices.
Jeffrey Brown looks at what we
learned from and about the
court.
JEFFREY BROWN: The court's 2015
session took on a big and broad
landscape, free speech,
the rights of pregnant workers,
housing discrimination, the use
of lethal injection, and, of
course,
the fate of Obamacare, and the
definition of marriage itself.
We take our own big and
broad look with three
of the country's top Supreme
Court watchers, Joan Biskupic,
legal affairs editor for Reuters
and author of biographies of
Justices Scalia and Sotomayor,
Amy Howe, editor of SCOTUSblog,
and, of course, our own regular
contributor Marcia Coyle of "The
National Law Journal,"
author of the book
"The Roberts Court."
Welcome to you all.
Joan, you start us off.
Was there a big theme that you
saw emerge from this term?
JOAN BISKUPIC, Reuters: Well,
you know, we always try to
isolate the courts for the
one term.
But the court never sits still
to just say, OK, just judge us
by this term. So we have
to step back a little bit. Of
course, we had the upholding for
the second time of President
Obama's Affordable Care Act,
which was big for so many of
your viewers. We had this
fundamental right to
same-sex marriage declared.
And those two sort of gave the
court a little bit of liberal
identification, but the truth
is that this is still pretty
much of a conservative court.
They also upheld the lethal
injection
nationwide for death penalty.
So I would say that we saw
several things, but mostly
what it comes down to is, it
depends on the case, it depends
on Anthony Kennedy, our
traditional
swing vote justice.
And this time, he did go more
with the liberals. And for the
chief himself, we saw him going
in both directions, but still
being very consistent for
himself.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK, Amy, pick up
on that. The chief, the key
players, what do you
see?
AMY HOWE, SCOTUSblog.com: Well,
I think it was interesting,
because it's certainly
true that the four liberal
justices were in the majority in
a lot of the important cases
this term, including same-sex
marriage, including Obamacare,
housing discrimination.
But I wouldn't look at this as a
term in which the law
necessarily moved to the left,
that
these were actually liberal
victories, as much as they were
the liberals staving off
efforts by the right to move the
law to the right. And so
same-sex marriage, undoubtedly,
that was a decision that
moved the law to the left.
Until last Friday, there was no
nationwide right to same-sex
marriage. Now there is.
But when you look at a lot of
the other big cases, whether
you're talking about Obamacare,
housing discrimination, a case
involving whether or not
Congress can order interest the
executive
branch to put Israel on the
passport of U.S. citizens who
were born in Jerusalem, these
are all cases in which all that
happened really was that the law
stayed the same.
JEFFREY BROWN: Status quo.
AMY HOWE: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Marcia, you
have, of course, worked us
through, walked it through play
by play throughout the term.
Put a bigger hat on here.
Let me show a couple of graphics
that we have to show some of the
alliances. So, the Affordable
Care Act, here's the 6-3
decision in that. And then we
will put up the gay marriage
case, and you can see the
shifts. What do you see in
terms of the alliances that took
place this term?
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal": Well, I think the
alliances are what distinguished
a lot of these cases.
You saw movement from justices
on the right over to the left,
and they were the reason
that we had the victories in the
same-sex marriage case, health
care as well. I think
we learned a lot about the court
from this particular term. We
learned a lot about
the differences among the
justices on the right and how
they interpret the Constitution
and how they interpret
federal laws.
JEFFREY BROWN: You mean the
right as a bloc itself? It was
interesting to watch.
MARCIA COYLE: Yes.
I think we -- as we have said in
the past, these justices on the
left and the right are
not monolithic blocs at all.
And we saw in many of the big
cases this term that the
justices on the right don't
march in lockstep when it comes
to interpreting the
Constitution.
We saw, for example, in same-sex
marriage that Justice Kennedy
has a broader conception
of individual -- individual
liberty that is protected by the
14th Amendment than his -- the
colleagues to the right of him.
And we saw in the health care
case that the chief justice
interprets statutes differently
from Justice Scalia.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, Joan, can we
talk about a -- we talk about a
Roberts court, right?
But we're saying here that that
has meanings that change around.
JOAN BISKUPIC: It does.
And the chief himself was in the
majority less this term than he
has been in past terms.
And that's another reason to
remember that you judge a term
by the particular cases that
are up there for those nine
months. And next year, we're
going to have so many other
different kinds of cases that,
frankly, at this point might
play more to the justices
on the right wing.
But it's Roberts court in name.
We informally give it that. In
terms of winners and losers,
we probably should say it's the
Kennedy court, as we have said
for many, many years. But
just to pick up with what Marcia
said about the justices on the
left hanging together,
Justice Ginsburg has a view that
she will assign an opinion, she
will write up an opinion,
and they will sign it. Her
colleagues will sign it.
Once you're -- if you're in the
dissent and you're on the right
wing, they're going to
naturally splinter even further
than they already are. There is
a lot of difference
between Clarence Thomas, who is
on the far right, and Anthony
Kennedy, who is also on
the right, much more of a
difference than among at all
those four justices on the
liberal
side.
JEFFREY BROWN: I want to ask.
I will start with you on this,
Amy Howe, the question of the
rhetoric, because it's something
we all watch and you're all
there in the court and reading
the decisions. There's a lot
of strong rhetoric this term,
right? This is Glossip vs.
Gross, the capital execution
case, right?
So, we have Justice Scalia
referring to some words by
Justice Breyer as gobbledygook.
Scalia
is always good for...
(CROSSTALK)
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
Was this unusual?
AMY HOWE: It did seem a little
bit unusual. Every term, by the
end of the term -- because,
frequently, especially the last
few years, that's when a lot of
the high-profile cases
have been coming down
And so those are the cases on
which the justices are more
likely to be closely divided.
They're
tired of each other. They're
ready for summer vacation.
JEFFREY BROWN: They're normal
people, like the rest of us.
(CROSSTALK)
AMY HOWE: They're tired.
They're tired, and they're tired
of each other, because they're
working so hard at
the end of June.
But this session, when you had
Justice Scalia in the same-sex
marriage case saying that
he would rather hide his head in
a bag than sign on to an opinion
that started the way
that Justice Kennedy started his
opinion in the same-sex marriage
case, that's really
kind of remarkable.
And so I think there is a couple
of things going on. I think
that the conservatives
this term were frustrated that
they were on the losing side in
some of these cases,
particularly
maybe the Obamacare, ACA
subsidies case, that they
probably expected to win.
And it seemed, when I looked
back at the rhetoric in some of
the dissents, the rhetoric was
particularly strong on the part
of justices like Justices
Scalia, Thomas and Alito, when
it was directed at majority
opinions, for example, in the
same-sex marriage case, in
the Obamacare case, that were
written by conservatives.
It's one thing if you're Justice
Scalia and you think Justice
Ginsburg has written an
end-driven opinion with no
grounding in legal doctrine or
anything like that. We kind
of expect that from her, is the
thinking on Justice Scalia's
part.
But it's another thing when you
have got Justice Kennedy or the
chief justice changing sides
in a case that he regards
as fundamentally important.
JEFFREY BROWN: What about,
Marcia, now looking ahead? And
Joan referred to some of these
cases. There are some
big cases coming.
MARCIA COYLE: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: I mean, there's
always big ones, but there's big
ones that could shift
our whole perception
again. Right?
MARCIA COYLE: There are.
Already, the court has on its
docket for next term a major
case involving unions and agency
shop fees that non-union members
pay in order for the union to
represent them during collective
bargaining. There, it seems,
sentiment on the court to find
that they're unconstitutional
under the First Amendment.
The court also has, once again,
taken affirmative action in
higher education, a case...
JEFFREY BROWN: Which has
colleges worried again.
MARCIA COYLE: Absolutely. And
it's the second time for this
particular case that
they're going to
be looking at it.
The court has a political case
involving the meaning of one
person, one vote, after all
these years, in redistricting,
and teeing up we're seeing
coming now, because there
have been a slew of emergency
requests for stays in lower
court cases involving abortion
clinics, voting rights. And we
may also see next term a
challenge to President Obama's
executive action on immigration.
So, it could be, as Joan said,
an extremely different term.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just a very
brief last word on that? You
see some real challenges?
JOAN BISKUPIC: Yes. I think
next year at this time, we could
all be sitting around
saying, what a swing
to the right it was.
And I will just mention one
thing that the chief himself has
said at this time of year.
It's a very good thing we all
get a break from each other.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, on
that -- not that I want to take
a break from the three
of you, but we will end there.
Joan Biskupic, Amy Howe, Marcia
Coyle, thanks very much.
AMY HOWE: Thank you.
MARCIA COYLE: Thanks, Jeff.
JOAN BISKUPIC: Thanks, Jeff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next:
neuroscience and education.
Thousands of teachers around the
country are learning about an
alternative teaching program
that aims to use scientific
discoveries about the brain to
improve the way children learn
in the classroom.
Special correspondent John
Tulenko of Learning Matters
reports from Philadelphia.
JASSELLE CIRINO, Teacher,
Francis Scott Key Elementary:
When I say class, you...
CLASS: You stop what you're
doing. Look at the teacher.
JOHN TULENKO: Today is Wacky
Wednesday in Jasselle Cirino's
third grade classroom, which
explains the blue wig.
JASSELLE CIRINO: So I want
you to teach your neighbor.
JOHN TULENKO: But the rest of
what you're about to see is what
her classroom looks like
every day.
JASSELLE CIRINO: I
want giant gestures.
JOHN TULENKO: She uses a set of
techniques some call whole brain
teaching.
JASSELLE CIRINO: A lot of times
in traditional teaching, you're
just lecturing, and you're
talking and talking. And what
we like to say, whole brainers,
we like to say that the
more you talk, the more students
you lose. And so we use
different methods to engage
multiple parts of the brain.
And that way, you get 100
percent engagement.
JOHN TULENKO: These days,
scientists can look further into
the brain than ever, pinpointing
the neurons and circuits that
control how we think and act.
All that's sparking a
movement that's changing the
way some teachers teach.
Are there parts of the brain
that you're aiming at?
JASSELLE CIRINO: Yes, the
hippocampus, the motor cortex,
the prefrontal cortex, which
is the brain's boss, so
something like class, it turns
on the prefrontal cortex, which
makes
the brain's decisions.
So it says, hey, pay attention.
I'm about to tell you something.
So, once I have their
attention, I teach the material
usually through mirrors.
This deals with the
mirror neurons in your
brain. And so what I say, they
repeat. To learn anything, you
have to repeat something.
You have to repeat something
that's modeled to you. That's
where it starts.
JOHN TULENKO: A lot of times in
your class, I saw you gesture,
and then you asked your
students to gesture.
JASSELLE CIRINO: Right. That's
for engaging their motor cortex.
When you act things
out while you're reading, you
comprehend more. And we use
brainees. These are gestures
that are tied to writing skills.
JOHN TULENKO: Can you
give me some examples?
JASSELLE CIRINO: Sure. For
example is an example. But or
however. If, then,
so more of like a cause and
effect. Adjective. A noun is a
person, place or thing, compare,
contrast, simile, metaphor, I
mean, the list goes on and on.
JOHN TULENKO: I saw you a bunch
of times where you would stop,
and then you would say
to the group, teach.
JASSELLE CIRINO: Teach.
JOHN TULENKO: What's
going on there?
JASSELLE CIRINO: So I have
taught them the lesson, but now
they need to teach that main
point to each other. They're
getting another repetition of
the material, but, this time,
a lot of times it's in their own
words. And they're learning how
to put things in their
own words.
You're writing while you're
doing it. You're gesturing, so
you're remembering it in
different
parts of the brain. You're not
just listening. You're also
speaking. You need to be doing
all of these things at once in
order to engage the whole brain.
JOHN TULENKO: We wanted to know
if science actually backed up
any of this. So we brought
a video of Jasselle's class to
Daphna Shohamy, a neuroscientist
at Columbia University.
DAPHNA SHOHAMY, Neuroscientist,
Columbia University: I buy it.
It makes great sense to me.
I mean, the brain is really in
many ways wired for actions.
Right? It's -- it's really
not wired to sit passively and
absorb any information. But I
think where -- you know,
where I wouldn't fully agree is
the idea that more activity is
always good. More brain
activity in more places doesn't
equal more learning or a better
memory.
JOHN TULENKO: OK. How can
children learn better?
DAPHNA SHOHAMY: Right, right.
Yes, it's the million-dollar
question. I think we
have some answers.
The brain learns when things are
surprising and interesting.
JASSELLE CIRINO: What
is going on here?
DAPHNA SHOHAMY: So if I give
you a $20 bill, now, all of a
sudden, you will sort of have
a burst of activity in your
dopamine neurons. They fire.
But if I do that regularly, like
every five minutes, I give you
$20, your dopamine neurons
will stop firing. So what these
neurons are doing is they're
signaling how unexpected
an event was in the world.
They're not signaling how good
or bad it was. They're
signaling
how unexpectedly good or
unexpectedly bad it was.
So keeping things a little bit
noisy and a little bit different
is actually really beneficial
for learning in many
different ways.
JASSELLE CIRINO:
Hold your horses.
JOHN TULENKO: Neuroscience says
there's something else important
going on here.
JASSELLE CIRINO: When you're
learning things, just even in
life, you connect it with a type
of feeling. And so the main
emotion we want you to feel in a
whole brain classroom is
fun.
Seriously?
DAPHNA SHOHAMY: Our brain was
evolved to survive. We need to
remember things that
were of emotional and social
significance. That's probably
much more important than
remembering any bit of
information that was
communicated to us within a
lecture.
JASSELLE CIRINO: We're done
being blah. It's time to get
fuzzy.
CLASS: Fuzzy!
JOHN TULENKO: Here are a few
other things neuroscientists
think the rest of us ought
to know about the brain, that
stress damages neurons and
impairs learning. Brain
training
games claim to be effective,
but, in fact, the jury's still
out.
What does help is regular
physical exercise. Staying
active keeps the brain
developing
and delays cognitive
decline as we get older.
In Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
I'm John Tulenko reporting for
the "NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: As for results,
a study on the effect of whole
brain teaching in one
California elementary school
found test scores in math and
language arts rose by an average
of 11 percent.
Let's look at a space mission
that's generating lots of
interest and excitement. It's
the
mission to orbit the dwarf
planet Ceres by the NASA
spacecraft named Dawn.
It arrived in March, and as the
spacecraft has gotten closer in
recent weeks, it's getting
a better view of the planet,
leading to some intriguing
questions.
MARC RAYMAN, Dawn Mission
Director: Our team sat down
with Dawn's mission director
in California and put
together this video.
We launched Dawn from Cape
Canaveral in September 2007. In
my view, Dawn is exploring two
of the last uncharted worlds in
the inner solar system. In more
than 57 years of space
exploration, it's the only
spacecraft ever to orbit two
extraterrestrial destinations.
I'm Marc Rayman, the chief
engineer and mission director
for the Dawn mission.
Vesta and Ceres are the two most
massive objects in the main
asteroid belt. There are
millions
of objects orbiting the sun
there between Mars and Jupiter.
But Ceres itself contains
about a third of the mass
of all of those objects.
Ceres is the largest object in
the main asteroid belt. In
fact, it's the largest object
between
the sun and Pluto that a
spacecraft had not visited prior
to Dawn, so it's almost 600
miles across. This is a big
place. It's more than one
million square miles. It's
got 38 percent of the area of
the continental United States.
Ceres and Vesta, they are
remnants from the epic in our
solar system of the formation
of planets, the dawn of our
solar system. And so scientists
want to study these bodies
because they may tell us more
about the conditions and the
processes that were acting at
the
times planets formed.
As Dawn got closer to Ceres, one
of the first things we saw were
those bright spots. And
it's impossible not to be
mesmerized by these glowing
beacons shining out from the
unfamiliar
lands ahead.
The reason these are so bright
is that they reflect so much
more light than the rest of
Ceres does, maybe five times or
more as much light as the rest
of Ceres. And so the contrast
is just stark.
There are many possibilities for
what the bright spots might be.
They might be ice
in some form. They also might
be the remnants from ice that
was on the surface and
sublimated.
That is, it's almost as if the
ice evaporated into space and
left behind the materials that
had been dissolved in it, so
essentially salts that could be
very, very reflective.
And while we don't know yet what
they are, as we continue to get
in closer and get measurements,
not only with the camera, but
with the other sensors on the
spacecraft, we will figure
out what they are.
What it is about them, whether
it's a difference in the
chemical compositional nature of
this
material or something about its
structure, its makeup, why it
reflects so much more light,
we don't know. And it makes you
want to send a spacecraft there
to find out. And,
by golly, that's
what we're doing.
At Ceres, we fly the spacecraft
in four different orbits in
order to study this alien world.
So, we started out in an orbit
8,400 miles high, and then
eventually, we will fly it
down to only about 230 miles,
which is actually a little bit
closer to the surface of Ceres
than the International Space
Station is to the surface of
Earth.
Part of what is so exciting is,
not only does each orbit answer
questions for us, but it
raises new questions. And then
we can answer those questions by
going lower and getting
more detailed data. It's been a
remarkable, ambitious
interplanetary adventure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Our own Jenny
Marder helped produce that
piece. And visited NASA for
the story. And
she joins me now.
So, Jenny, thank you
for being here.
Really interesting. And you
just -- you heard the mission
director say, this is really
about learning about the
origins of our solar system.
JENNY MARDER: That's right.
Ceres is known as a protoplanet,
and that means that scientists
believe it was in the
process of forming, like a
full-pledged planet, and its
formation was suddenly halted,
likely
by the tremendous
gravity of Jupiter.
So what you're really seeing is
a planet in the process of
forming which is frozen in
time, so that it's really a
window into the beginning of the
solar system.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, as we just
saw in that description in the
pictures, the spacecraft
Dawn is getting closer and
closer. We heard him talk about
the bright spots. What is
the spacecraft seeing now?
JENNY MARDER: The spacecraft is
maneuvering now from its third
to its second orbit. Each
orbit brings it closer and
closer to the surface of Ceres.
So the images that we're seeing,
we're seeing images of the
craters, of valleys, a
three-mile-high
cone that sort of looks like a
volcano on Earth. And we're
seeing these bright spots
which are very interesting. In
August, we will start getting a
new crop of photos. These
are images coming from
Dawn at the third orbit.
Those photos will be three times
sharper than the images we're
seeing now. And then, in
early December, when it gets to
its closest altitude, those will
be 12 times sharper than
what we're seeing now and
actually 850 times sharper than
what we were seeing back in
January,
when Dawn first started
capturing these images.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, still trying
to figure out if there could
have been life or could
be life on this dwarf planet?
JENNY MARDER: Yes, that's a
really interesting question.
It's a question that this
mission likely won't answer,
because they're not collecting
anything
from the surface of the planet.
They will just -- they're just
orbiting it. However,
Ceres does seem to possibly,
very possibly have the
ingredients for life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Because
of those bright spots?
JENNY MARDER: At least as we
know it on Earth, life requires
three ingredients, food,
water, and energy.
And the energy could come from
radioactive nuclear decay from
the planet's interior.
The planet is very dark, which
they think indicates carbon-rich
compounds on the surface.
And then the third ingredient
is water. And it looks like
it's likely that these
bright spots are evidence of
water, of a liquid water mantle
underneath the surface.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it sounds
like the scientists are very
excited about this.
JENNY MARDER: Yes.
What's so cool about this is, is
it's incredible detective story
that we're just seeing unfolding
in real time. And as we get
closer and closer to the surface
of Ceres, this planet just
comes increasingly into focus.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jenny Marder,
thank you very much.
JENNY MARDER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can
learn more about the Dawn
mission to Ceres by going to our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Finally tonight: an encore look
at classical ballerina Misty
Copeland, who yesterday became
the first African-American
female principal dancer in
American Ballet Theatre's 75-
year
history.
Copeland sat down with us last
year to share the story of her
rise from poverty to the
spotlight. She read from her
memoir, "Life in Motion: An
Unlikely Ballerina," and she
recounted the evening she first
danced the title role in
Stravinsky's "Firebird."
MISTY COPELAND, American
Ballet Theatre: Outside,
the largest crowd I have ever
seen waits. Prominent members
of the African-American
community and trailblazers in
the world of dance who have
seldom received their due are
here tonight, but I know I will
also dance for those who aren't
here, who pass the Metropolitan
Opera House, but cannot
imagine what goes on inside.
They may be poor, like I have
been; insecure, like I have
been; misunderstood, like I have
been. I will be dancing for
them, too. I run onto the stage
and feel myself transform.
As I approach center, my flock
parts, leaving me to stand
alone. There's a brief second
of silence before the audience
erupts into applause once more,
clapping so loudly I can
barely hear the music.
And so it begins.
I'm Misty Copeland. And I'm a
soloist with American Ballet
Theatre.
I didn't come from a background
that would've introduced me to
this world in any way. I
didn't come from a family with
money. I had no knowledge of
the ballet world. I
had never heard
classical music before.
But I think, above all of that,
just starting at 13 and only
training for four years before
I was accepted into American
Ballet Theatre, America's
national ballet company, I think
is the most unlikely of it all.
I took a free ballet class at a
Boys and Girls Club surrounded
by other kids that had similar
backgrounds to me that were all
older. And I was selected to
come to my teacher's school
on a full scholarship. It was
the first time in my life that
that had been presented
to me, that I had no limits and
that I could dream. That wasn't
something I grew up in
my home atmosphere having.
I remember the first time I sat
on the stage at the Metropolitan
Opera House. I was 19
years old, still struggling to
find my place in ABT's Corps de
Ballet. I traced the marley
floor with my pointe shoes, and
imagine myself on the stage, not
as a member of the corps,
but as a principal dancer. It
felt right. It felt like a
promise. Some day, somehow,
it was going to happen for me.
The ballet world, I don't think
is an art form that is quick to
change or to adjust
or evolve. ABT and most
classical companies are about
kind of following this slow and
steady process of proving
yourself and moving up through
the ranks. And because I was
so able and capable of mimicking
and doing movements that I had
never done before, I
could just see it and imitate
it, choreographers wanted to
work with me.
You just have to be given the
opportunity and just give
everything to it and dive into
it and really commit to these
roles, which, with these
opportunities I have been given,
with Firebird and Swanilda,
Gamzatti, all of these parts
that I really just -- I took
care with all of them because I
have so much respect for this
art form.
The ballet world, I think, is so
similar to theater and drama,
and you're becoming a character.
I mean, it's not you out there
on the stage. You know, there
is no role called Misty
that I am playing. We're
portraying a character. And
even if you are in the Corps de
Ballet,
you know, why can't there be a
beige swan, a brown swan, a
black swan out there?
So I understand the importance
of me having a voice and
exposing people beyond the
typical
ballet world to this art form.
I think it saved my life. And I
want to introduce it
to more people. And coming full
circle, that's something that
I'm trying to do now,
is to give back to those
communities through Boys and
Girls Clubs, being an alum.
To invite people into my world
as it's happening, I think, is
really amazing. To have grown
men that have never seen a
ballet in their life look at me
and see a woman that they
can relate to, someone who looks
like their sister, their
daughter, their mother, and
to say, well, I'm going to put
my child in that because they
can see themselves through
you, I think it's creating a
completely different path for
these people that never saw
themselves
in this world.
And to watch me still growing in
it and on my path, I think, is
really powerful.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Misty Copeland's
huge talent reminding us just
how far she's come to get
where she is today, yesterday
named the first African-American
woman to be principal dancer
for the American Ballet Theatre.
And on the "NewsHour" online:
How does an expert in time use
structure her day? We
spent an afternoon going through
the to-do list of the director
of the University of
Maryland's Time Use Laboratory.
You won't be surprised to learn
that she doesn't always
practice what she teaches. Her
story is part of our work-life
balance series, and
that's on our home page.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Thursday, we will kick off a
two-part series on the legendary
band the Grateful Dead, who
are reuniting this weekend for a
series of concerts in Chicago.
But, first, we sit
down with drummer Mickey Hart
and his project to replicate the
sounds of the universe.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
at the "PBS NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.